it was a tragedy the federal government
has the capacity to mobilize the way we
need society to mobilize today and I've
had numerous conversations with the
president I spoke with him again last
night he is mobilizing he's mobilizing
the federal government we had a number
of meetings with different federal
officials yesterday and I think that is
the best positive sign that the federal
government is actually stepping up to
the plate you will see that this has
been diagnosed pardon the pun as a
health care crisis from moment one this
has always been about one thing
reducing the rate of spread so the
health care system can manage it and
it's been a question of math and
projections and it is still exactly that
can we get the spread down to a right
that the health care system can manage
what is going to be the issue in the
health care system it's gonna be the
number of hospital beds it's going to be
the amount of protective equipment and
most of all it's going to come down to
ventilators a piece of equipment that up
until now was relatively inconsequential
but when you have respiratory illnesses
and then this volume of respiratory
illnesses all of a sudden the number of
ventilators becomes critical just to
give you a sense of scope we have about
5,000 6,000 ventilators that we can
identify we need about 30,000
ventilators this is a nationwide problem
I was on the phone with the governor's
from the other states with the National
Governors Association yesterday every
state is shopping for ventilators we're
shopping for for ventilators we
literally have people in China
shopping for ventilators which is one of
the largest manufacturers so this is a
major problem it's an issue that the
federal government can actually play a
very constructive role is something
called the federal defense procurement
Act where the federal government can
basically order companies to produce
certain materials and we're going to
need protective equipment in hospitals
we're going to need ventilators and that
is something that a state can't do but
the federal government can do also as
this has gone on we said we are fighting
a war on two fronts we're fighting the
virus and we're fighting fear and they
are two totally different situations
that you have to deal with in many ways
the fear is more dangerous than the
virus I started working on disasters
emergency situations when I was in my
30s my first experience was Hurricane
Andrew in Homestead Florida and I felt
it I saw on the ground what happens when
people panic and the panic in the fear
is as dangerous or more dangerous than
the hurricane I've seen it in floods
I've seen it in fires
we now have misinformation and fear in
panic which is as contagious a more
contagious than the virus and we have to
deal with both of them I've had some
conversations that are just irrational
with people who heretofore were wholly
rational I had a conversation last night
with a business person from New York
City who I know who was panicked that
New York City was going to be locked
down that they were going to be
roadblock
that they were gonna be mandatory
quarantine he was going to be imprisoned
in this house I said you know where did
you hear that well that's what they say
that's what I'm hearing they're saying
and I was saying you know look I would
know right because I would have to
authorize those actions legally it's not
going to happen well I hear it is going
to happen I said but I know but I would
have to do it and I'm telling you I'm
not doing it it must have taken me 25
minutes just to slow him down to hear
the information when you get that
emotional that fearful you literally
don't process information the same way
so we have to be very aware of that
clear communication from everyone from
our friends in the media from the health
care professionals from all elected
officials clear communication consistent
communication because misinformation
emotion fear panic is truly more
dangerous than the virus at this
position in my opinion because the facts
on the virus we know we've watched it
from China to South Korea we've studied
it here we know the numbers it is
exactly what we said it was it's exactly
what we said it was from day one we
talked about the increased spread we
talked about the vulnerable populations
seniors compromised immune systems
people with underlying illnesses so we
know what this virus does we know how it
communicates and we know how to deal
with it it's not going to be easy it's
not going to be pretty but we know the
trajectory of the virus let's just take
a deep breath and make sure we're
we're acting on facts as opposed to
acting on fear when you act on fear then
you're in a dangerous place the facts we
can handle let me give you a couple of
the new facts today just to recap we
said we have a plan of action there are
three steps flatten the curve slow the
spread increase the current hospital
capacity and number three identify new
hospital beds do them all at the same
time which is the challenge make
government work mobilize operationalize
get it all done get it all done today on
density reduction this is a data-driven
decision look at the increase in the
number of cases look at the hospital
capacity and do adjust and do everything
you can to slow the increase of the
spread so that your hospital system can
deal with the growth we've been taking
increasing steps on density reduction
because the numbers have been increasing
and again this is driven by science and
by data we said voluntary work from home
mandatory closing of schools statewide
mandatory reduction of state and local
workforce mandatory tri-state agreement
on bars restaurants gyms mandatory in
office workforce cut by 50% we said that
yesterday the numbers have gone up
overnight I am going to increase the
density control today no more than 25%
of people can be in the work force
yesterday it was 50% we're reducing it
again except the essential services that
we spoke about yesterday that means 75%
of the workforce must stay at home and
work from home again voluntarily I'm
asking all the
to have people work from home as a
mandate 75% of your employee base must
work from home in terms of increasing
current hospital capacity our current
hospital capacity is about 50 thousand
beds statewide majority of those beds
are in downstate New York Commissioner
Zucker is working with the hospital
industry he's going to put out new
regulations assessing how many more beds
we can get in our existing hospitals
waiving Department of Health rules
waiving department of financial service
rules
how many more beds can we get in those
hospitals and we're working on that
aggressively at the same time
identifying new hospital beds the Army
Corps of Engineers was with us yesterday
we had a very good meeting we're looking
at sites across the state to find
existing facilities that could
expeditiously be turned into healthcare
facilities and again when I said the
federal response is very welcome I want
to thank the president he said that he
would bring the Army Corps of Engineers
here they came here the next day I spoke
to him last night to follow up on the
meeting so this is going forward
aggressively we're also going to take a
bold action but a necessary action that
offering 90-day relief on mortgage
payments waiving mortgage payments based
on financial hardship meaning if you are
not working if you're working on in part
time we're going to have the banks and
financial institutions waive mortgage
payments for 90 days that will be a real
life economic benefit it will also be a
stress reliever for many families
waiving these payments will not have a
negative effect on your credit report
there'll be a grace period for long
vacation were not exempting people from
the mortgage payments we're just
adjusting the mortgage to include those
payments on the back end no late fees or
online payment fees postponing or
suspending any foreclosures during this
period of time and waiving fees for
overdrafts ATM credit cards this is a
real life benefit people are on the
tremendous economic pressure making a
mortgage payment can be one of the
number-one stressors eliminating that
stressor for 90 days I think will go a
long way again we'll reassess as the
situation goes on if that should be
extended or not number of positive cases
total positive 4,000 number of new
positive 1769 you see additional
counties that are being added to count
these that have cases the spread mirrors
what's happening in the country just as
a spread has gone through all states the
spread is going through our counties was
downstate first it's now moving upstate
New York now has 2000 cases
Washington State 1,100 cases Washington
State had cases earlier because it went
through a nursing home if you remember
but New York State has more cases than
Washington State more more cases than
any state in the nation and I've made
that point to the federal government and
the president and he understands that if
there's a state that needs help the
state by the number of cases is New York
in terms of testing we have tested now
22,000 we tested 7500 people last night
why are you seeing the numbers go up
because you are taking more tests people
see those numbers go up they get nervous
they panic or look at how many more
people have
the virus that's not how many more
people have the virus you're just taking
more tests so you're finding more
positives there are thousands and
thousands of people who have the virus
who we're not testing
there are thousands and thousands of
people who had the virus before we
started testing
there are thousands and thousands of
people who had the virus and who
resolved and never knew they had the
virus we're still testing because you
want to find those positive cases so you
can track them down isolate people and
stop the spread but you can't watch
these numbers like the stock market and
say well that's the indicator of of
anything other than the indicator of how
many tests were taking it is good news
that we're now up to 7500 tests we were
at one time doing 200 tests per day just
to put that 7,500 in focus so that's a
tremendous increase in the number of
tests and you're gonna see the numbers
go up the hospitalization rate is very
relevant because remember this is all
about the flow into the healthcare
system so 777 out of 4152 perspective
perspective perspective we know the
virus we know what it does we know who
it hurts
we know who defects Johns Hopkins since
day one has tracked this virus through
China 222 thousand cases 9,000 deaths
eighty four thousand recoveries 129,000
pending one last point we talked about
this as a government response the
federal government's doing this state
government is doing this government
government government this this
manifests on a number of levels and the
government response is obviously very
important but the impact I think is
greater greater and probably greatest
as a social phenomenon and on people and
on families this is tremendously
disruptive on all sorts of levels it
came out of the blue for me in New
Yorker reminds me of 9/11 where one
moment which was inconceivable just
changed everything changed your
perspective on the world change your
perspective on safety children who were
young at that time but of school age
watched on TV they didn't know if their
parents were coming home I think it
changed their whole outlook on life
after 9/11 this is a situation like that
it's obviously totally different
magnitudes but it's like that it's a
moment that just changes your whole life
yesterday you were going to work and you
were going to go to the office party
today you're at home and the kids are at
home and you're worried about health and
you're worried about your job and you're
worried about economics and you're
dealing with personal issues and you're
dealing with family issues and it's all
happening at once and then you turn on
the TV and there's all this different
information and nobody can tell you if
this is gonna be 30 days or 60 days or
four months or five months or nine
months the stress the emotion is just
incredible and rightfully so it is a
situation that is one of the most
disruptive that I have seen and it will
change almost everything going forward
it will that is a fact it's not your
perception it's not just you it's all of
us
and it's true and it's real nobody can
tell you when this is going to end
nobody can tell you I talked to all the
experts nobody can say 2 months 4 months
9 months nobody it's hard living your
life with that big a question mark out
there nobody can tell you when you go
back to work people can tell you that
it's not just you economically it's
everyone take comfort in that federal
government is actually acting on an
economic package but it's true having
your family all together is a beautiful
thing it's also different for a lot of
people especially for a prolonged period
of time so these are major shifts in
life and in the most emotional stressful
conditions that you can imagine and I
think my own personal advice is
understand it for what it is and that
it's not just you it has changed
everything and it will for the for the
foreseeable future and think through how
you're going to deal with it and what it
means and even try to find a positive in
it right it's a very negative
circumstance but you're going to have
time on your hands you're going to have
time with your family you're going to
have time at home in this busy hurry-up
world all of a sudden somebody said ok
you have a couple of months where you're
going to be home with the family
no work you work from home but it's a
totally different situation how do you
use that how do you adjust it's not
going to be done overnight
but it is something that everybody has
to think through my last last point is
to the younger people in our great state
in an
great society and that's why you I
invited our special guests here today
Michaela
my grandfather Andrea my grandfather on
my father's side name was Andrea I'm
named for my grandfather Andrew
italian-american immigrant when I was
young
ish I was like 16 17 18 and I would do
something that he didn't like he would
just look at me and he would say we grow
too soon old and too late
smart and I would say what does that
mean grandpa you crazy is that a
criticism we grow too soon old too late
smart these pictures of young people on
beaches these videos of young people
saying is my Spring Break
you know I'm out the party this is my
time to party this is so unintelligent
and reckless I can't even begin to
express it now
I had a conversation with my daughter
about this I'm governor of the state I
can order a quarantine of 10,000 people
but I can't tell my daughter to do
anything all right
and I have to be careful because there's
almost an inverse response to a direct
action but I did say to all three of
them from as soon as they could crawl I
used one line what is the one line I
used to say risk reward risk reward risk
for award just pose the question I
couldn't offer an answer because of
whatever answer I would offer they would
do the other risk for award it makes no
sense to go expose yourself to these
conditions and expose other people
expose other people
Michaela wanted to take first of all
Michaela
was graduating this year and her school
closed to online courses she's not going
to have the graduation we're gonna have
a big party at the appropriate time we
don't know what that time is going to be
it's gonna be 2 months 4 months 6 months
9 months but at the first opportunity
we're gonna have a big party so that's
going to happen but she was deprived of
the last year and the last few months of
college which I'm sure were a very
intense study period and that's what
she's deprived of that intense study
period of those last few weeks I
remember those last few weeks a lot of
study but that's a shift in life but she
was going to take a vacation on spring
break and go with friends and take a
trip and risk/reward and luckily she
made the right decision and I'm proud of
her for that no prompting from me
besides the questions risk/reward what
these people are doing is the risk does
not justify the reward they're putting
themselves at risk young people can get
coronavirus that's one of the other
myths young people don't get it young
people do get it and young people can
transfer it and you can wind up
infecting someone and possibly killing
someone if you're exposed to it risk for
reward questions comments
[Music]
the economic consequences here are for
the MTA for the state budget for County
budgets town budgets Villa village
budgets all the public authorities it's
just a big question mark they've all
lost tremendous revenues and we're gonna
have to figure out as a nation how to
deal with this the ridership is down on
the MTA and the revenue is down on the
MTA and say hello to every other public
transit system in this United States of
America so it's going to have to be a
national response
[Music]
yeah
the MTA will continue running they're an
essential service on the essential
service list and the revenues we're
going to have to make do Rob do you have
anything that you want do it the
ridership is down in all of the systems
right but the workers are there
the workers are running the trains the
trains are running on time and New York
City still has right there are still
some businesses and essential services
that are flowing so the MTA is part of
bringing bringing people back and forth
so right now we're looking at that but
every transit system in the nation is
facing the same the same reality
we're looking at we're looking at the
empty as well so this is part of the
discussions that we're having with the
legislature right now we're looking at
the and as the governor mentioned the
entire budget is impacted right this
right so we're gonna have to have
flexibility in the budget to be able to
prioritize certain services over others
as the governor indicated the MTA is an
essential service for New York City also
because remember all these broad
statements we have to run a government
we have to run and service a society
right we need the health care system up
and running doctors have to get to work
nurses have to get to work health care
workers have to get to work we need
police we need fire we need bus drivers
we need day care workers that all those
functions have to happen so we need a
transportation system because we need
people getting to work refuse has to be
picked up right all these functions have
to continue so when they talk about
shutdown you know we have to make sure
we're operational and healthy and
functional I know you put trouble with
the phrase shelter in place but are you
considering any kind of more stringent
restrictions on people leaving the home
or going to businesses or things like
that yeah the I believe communication is
important and I believe words are
important say what you mean and don't
say what might alarm people the level of
alarm in this country in this state
especially in New York City is higher
than I have ever seen it somehow people
have the idea that New York City may be
quarantined may be locked off that they
may be imprisoned in their home I don't
know where they get it this is the
conversation I was talking about last
night this is a smart person who I know
for a long time just panic just fear
none of that is going to happen none of
that is going to happen
there is no quarantine plan for New York
City Oh said to me well you did a
containment plan for New Rochelle my
containment plan in New Rochelle didn't
contain anyone it was a bad word it
meant to contain the virus you could
come and go in New Rochelle Schools were
closed large gatherings were closed but
there was no quarantine containment well
you called out the National Guard I
called out the National Guard
that was food delivery and cleaning
surfaces and by the way we use the
National Guard every time there's a
snowstorm or a fire or a flood I call
out the National Guard
it does not signal martial law shelter
in place mandatory evacuation but you
don't have to move a q8 button don't
call a mandatory evacuation mandatory
fasting but you can eat well then don't
call it fasting if you look at the
principles of shelter in place
first of all shelter in place is
deceptive because it does have a meaning
shelter in place literally means it
comes it's currently used in an
active-shooter context it was most
recently used for nuclear war protection
and what shelter and placement was find
the room in your house with no windows
where you would be free from smoke or
gases and stay there until you get the
all-clear sign that's where it comes
from
well we mean a modified shelter in place
and don't say shelter in place say
modified shelter in place if you look at
what other places call shelter in place
it's what we're doing now what you're
doing the San Francisco Bay Area is
basically warning people you know only
do essential things you can go get
medicine you can go get
Oh trees things like that would you
consider that sort of model the San
Francisco model for New York City or any
place in this you want to wager a dollar
that's not what San Francisco model says
be careful here it is
he so I will take your dollar the
shelter in place except go out for
Central Services walk the pet go out for
exercise walking biking running family
members homes to help with a family
member or a family member pet well if
I'm going out to help with pets right
I'm not in a room in the post nuclear
holocaust waiting for an all-clear son
so language matters that's all I'm
saying we are doing excuse me a second
businesses were down to only 25 percent
of the workforce should go to work that
will continue to adjust with the spread
the on the residential side stay home
stay home if you have to go out to shop
for essential services go out to shop if
you have to go help a family member they
have a problem go help a family member
with a problem but and if you have to
get outside of the house to exercise to
get some fresh air which is a hundred
percent necessary for a lot of people a
lot of circumstances then do it but
social distancing just stay away from
people stay away from these people even
in New York City Parks who are all
clustered together I don't know what
they're thinking stay away from people a
person can infect you and they won't
even know that they have the virus and
then a special consideration if you are
a senior citizen then hyper cautious on
all these points or compromised immune
or underlying illness but if you look at
with the actual rules Jesse what San
Francisco is doing what we're doing
there virtually identical
at this point words matter at this point
words matter quarantine locked down
these words are scary words and nobody
is talking about those things a shelter
in place is a scary term for people
especially when they don't know what it
means and especially when you're not
doing what it means if you're not doing
that why do you call it that we have a
mandatory evacuation policy but you
don't have to evacuate well then why did
you call a mandatory evacuation
why do you why do you scare me and then
I have to get unwound right there's not
an active-shooter shelter in place it's
not a nuclear holocaust shelter in place
wait for the all-clear sign there's not
going to be any all-clear sign now that
the deadline has been shortened we
changed the dates didn't we so what the
legislature did yesterday was they
passed a law to make the filing deadline
for the petition travel with the new end
date of the petition previously it had
been I thinked March 30th and then
between April 1st and April 3rd you had
to file so if you see the dates actually
just traveled exactly the issue with
leaving the filing deadline open is it
invites fraud people can continue to go
out and collect signatures and predate
them so that was all that we did we had
the dates travel together there is a lot
of patterns
about the village of prettiest girl and
they sit community there do you know
anything about any positive tests in
that village and is that an area of
concern at this point I have not heard
that John I haven't even heard the
rumors
normally I hear the rooms but I mean
there are rumors a positive testing in
Paris Hall and I'm trying to figure out
at that school I have not heard not that
we are highly attuned to rumors unless
they come from the LC yet those rumors
were here we would have to get those
numbers for you you know we're giving
you the most recent numbers on a rolling
basis but then sometimes they come with
incomplete information as to where is
everyone
and the numbers are getting so big now
that they're hard to get all the
particulars but as soon as we get them
we'll give them to you there is a global
you know how we went through the price
gouging unlike hand sanitizer and you
know we make our own hand sanitizer here
in the state of Maine I can get it for
you
I know I know people I know people
Citrix Mel I was kidding when I said it
was that floral bouquet I took up
pounding for that I thought it was an
obvious joke obviously not everybody
appreciates my sense of humor yeah I
know I know too well the what was the
question again
ventilators we had price gouging on the
hand sanitizer the ventilators there is
a global rush for ventilators and
literally we have people on the ground
in China you can't even buy them from
China and as I mentioned they had the
National Governors Association I had all
the gut most of the governor's on the
telephone yesterday and every state is
looking for them that's why the federal
government has to come in and handle
this because he I believe the Army Corps
of Engineers
and the state working together can
create more beds the beds do me very
little good without the ventilator
because almost all of these kovat cases
require the ventilator and a bed is
great but if you don't have the
ventilator then the bed is virtually
useless there is a federal stockpile of
medical equipment I haven't gotten an
official number but the suggestion is
that stockpile has about 12,000
ventilators for the nation again just
for context where we are we have about
five or 6,000 secured we need 30,000
federal government has 12 I mean this is
a bad situation and it would literally
take the federal government to say to
manufacturers stop what you're making or
start making these machines they're
fairly technical as I understand that
but the supply chain issues are real but
it would take the federal government
saying we need to make these ventilators
it would take the federal government to
say we need PPE equipment we need gloves
we need masks you know when the CDC
starts putting our guidance you can use
a scarf as a mask you know it's time to
make more masks and yesterday rest of
the restaurant and tavern associations
wrote a letter you practically begging
you to delay that deadline is that at
all a possibility you know that's John
Campbell you know the video on Bologna
he's the man okay we'll talk later
but I'm the unaffected so I don't like
to answer his questions because this one
here Rob Keynesian cuz I don't know the
answer I was just stalling we're looking
at the deadline but just to be clear
this is for sales taxes that were
collected prior right for sales that
were prior to the crisis so it's people
pay their sales taxes the businesses
collect them on behalf of the state
so there's holding those taxes so we're
looking at the deadlines but just to be
clear what that we're not asking them to
pay anything they're holding taxes that
belong to the state but we're looking at
the deadlines because they might not be
able to file and the timing of it so
we're considering and we'll have
something incision on that there's no
real money for the state in the budget
it's good for people it's good for
industries but its de minimis from our
point of view one one one less less last
point the I'm glad that Michaela is with
me here today all this government talk
this is a social family issue as much as
anything and it has to be talked through
and dealt with family by family and it's
a little different for all families I'm
dealing with it with my family with my
daughters with my siblings with my
person have the most concern for which
is my mother
so I thank her for joining me today
she's with me up in Albany now she's not
on spring break I think it's cooler to
be with me they're like Road Trip right
are you sarcastic thank you guys very
much
thank you
no see you to everyone testing positive
what what are you doing to safeguard
prisoners and/or guards we have special
precautions in prisons I don't know
anything specific about Rikers Island I
just don't know
thank you guys